

AN URGENT MESSAGE FROM JACQUES-ALAIN MILLER
JOIN THE PETITION BY SENDING AN EMAIL TO THE ADDRESS BELOW
Free RAFAH!
We urge the Syrian authorities to release immediately and without restriction Rafah NACHED.
The famous psychoanalyst, trained in Paris, is currently in solitary confinement, after being arrested Saturday, September 10th, at 1: 30 am, at the Damascus airport when boarding for Paris, where her daughter was in labor. She is innocent.
We call on governments and international organizations to act urgently in this matter: Rafah is 66, she has heart disease, his life is in danger!
Psychoanalysts around the world will mobilize in his defense.
for more, go to http://laregledujeu.org/2011/09/13/7090/liberez-rafah-du-raffut-pour-rafah/
TO JOIN THE PETITION, SEND AN EMAIL TO: rafah.navarin@gmail.com 
Signed:
1.     Agnès Aflalo, psychoanalyst and writer
2.     Anne Poumellec, psychoanalyst, editor of Lacan Quotidien 
3.     Benoït Jacquot, director
4.     Bernard-Henri Lévy, philosopher and writer, director of La Règle du Jeu
5.     Brigitte Jaques-Wajeman, director
6.     Catherine Clément, novelist and philosopher
7.     Eve Miller-Rose, president of Navarin éditeur
8.     François Ansermet, Professeur, Faculté de médecine, Université de Genève
9.     François Regnault, philospher and playwright
10. Gérard Wajcman, psychoanalyst and writer
11. Jacques-Alain Miller, psychoanalyst and writer
12. Jean-Claude Milner, philosopher and writer
13. Jean-Daniel Matet, president of l’Ecole de la Cause freudienne
14. Judith Miller, present of Foundation of the Freudian Field
15. Julia Kristeva, co-president of the prize « Simone de Beauvoir pour la liberté des femmes »
16. Lilia Mahjoub, psychoanalyst, editor of Lacan Quotidien 
17. Maria De França, editor of La Règle du Jeu 
18. Michèle Manceaux, writer
19. Nathalie Georges-Lambrichs, psychoanalyst, director of  La Cause freudienne
20. Philippe Sollers, writer, director of L’Infini
21. Roland Dumas, former minister of Foreign Affairs (France)



								 
							
